README.md, before:

![run_test badge](https://github.com/Warwolt/rktest/actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml/badge.svg)

# RK Test

RK Test is a small test library for C99 programs, written to closely mimick
[Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest). RK Test is lightweight and
easy to integrate into a C project to add testing capabilities,  as it consists
of only a single source and single header file.

## Features
RK Test has the following features:
- Small and easy to integrate, one '\*.c' file and one '\*.h' file
- Supports Windows, MacOS and Linux.
- Self registering tests (relying on a compiler extension common to MSVC, AppleClang and GCC)
- xUnit style assertions and test reporting very close to Google Test

## Usage
Due to the similarities between RK Test and Google Test, it may be helpful to read the [Google Test primer](https://google.github.io/googletest/primer.html.).

To set up a simple test suite, create a source file that includes `rktest.h` and link against the `rktest_main` library.

Test cases are then defined with the `TEST()` macro, which takes to arguments: the name of the test suite, and the name of the test case. A body is then given, which will be executed like a function. The `EXPECT_EQ` takes two integral types and compares them, and fails the test in case they are not equal.

```C
#include <rktest/rktest.h>

int factorial(int n) {
	int result = 1;
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		result *= i;
	}

	return result;
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_negative_is_one) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(-1), 1);
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(-42), 1);
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_zero_is_one) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(0), 1);
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_positive_numbers) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(3), 6);
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(4), 24);
}
```

Building and running the above gives the following output:

![Sample1 output](/samples/sample01_output.png)

We can modify the `factorial` function to be faulty to observe the error messages printed when the tests fail.

```diff
int factorial(int n) {
	int result = 1;
-	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
+	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
		result *= i;
	}

	return result;
}
```

Rerunning the test suite now gives:

![Sample1 failing output](/samples/sample01_output_failing.png)

## Integrating
RK Test consists of two files, `rktest.c` and `rktest.h`. The easiest way to integrate RK Test into your project is to just add these two files to your source tree.

Build `rktest.c` and `rktest.h` into a library `rktest`, and then build an executable from your unit test files that links against this library. A `main.c` test runner main file should be added that calls `rktest_main`, or alternatively you can use the existing `rktest_main.c` file.

All the `TEST()` tests in your unit test files will automatically be discovered by RK Test and executed.

### CMake
In case your project is using CMake, you can easily integrate RK Test by adding this repository into your source tree and then including the RK Test `CMakeLists.txt` from your own.

## Assertions
All assertion macros come in `EXPECT_*` and `ASSERT_*` variants, where `EXPEC_*` continues to execute the remaining test on failure, whereas `ASSERT_*` aborts the current test case on failure.

Additionally, all macros has `*_INFO` variants, which allows passing a
printf-style formatting string that will be printed if the assertion fails to
give additional user specified details.

RK Test defines the following assertion macros for bools:

| Macro name           | Assertion               |
| -------------------- | ----------------------- |
| EXPECT_TRUE(actual)  | `actual` equals `true`  |
| EXPECT_FALSE(actual) | `actual` equals `false` |

Integer assertions:

| Macro name                  | Assertion              |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| EXPECT_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` == `expected` |
| EXPECT_NE(actual, expected) | `actual` != `expected` |
| EXPECT_LT(actual, expected) | `actual` < `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LE(actual, expected) | `actual `<= `expected` |
| EXPECT_GT(actual, expected) | `actual `> `expected`  |
| EXPECT_GE(actual, expected) | `actual `>= `expected` |

Long integer assertions:

| Macro name                       | Assertion              |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| EXPECT_LONG_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` == `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_NE(actual, expected) | `actual` != `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_LT(actual, expected) | `actual` < `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LONG_LE(actual, expected) | `actual `<= `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_GT(actual, expected) | `actual `> `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LONG_GE(actual, expected) | `actual `>= `expected` |

String assertions:

| Macro name                          | Assertion                                                     |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| EXPECT_STREQ(actual, expected)      | `actual` is the same string as `expected`                     |
| EXPECT_STRNE(actual, expected)      | `actual` is NOT the same string as `expected`                 |
| EXPECT_CASE_STREQ(actual, expected) | `actual` is the same string as `expected` (ignoring case)     |
| EXPECT_CASE_STRNE(actual, expected) | `actual` is NOT the same string as `expected` (ignoring case) |

Floating point assertions (See [this article](https://randomascii.wordpress.com/2012/02/25/comparing-floating-point-numbers-2012-edition/)
regarding Units in Last Place):

| Macro name                         | Assertion                                              |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| EXPECT_FLOAT_EQ(actual, expected)  | `actual` and `expected` are within 4 ULP of each other |
| EXPECT_DOUBLE_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` and `expected` are within 4 ULP of each other |

## Why use RK Test instead of Google Test?

While Google Test is a much more mature test library, it's written in C++. This means that when testing C code, it requires calling that C code from C++ code, which can be awkward due to requiring `extern C` or lacking C99-style designated initializers.

Additionally, the Google Test source is many thousands of lines long, which
makes it a non-trivial dependency to add to a project.

Comparatively, RK Test is lightweight at just around 1k lines of code in just
one `*.c` file and one `*.h` and is written in C, so both code under test and
the test cases are written in the same language. This allows RK Test to easily
be integrated into other C projects, while keeping largely the same development
experience as Google Test.

## See also

Here's a list of other unit test frameworks built on similar techniques:

- [Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest)
- [Criterion](https://github.com/Snaipe/Criterion/)
- [Rexo](https://github.com/christophercrouzet/rexo/)

## Building the test and sample files

The files in the `tests` and `samples` are by default not built, but can be enabled by passing the following when generating the CMake build:

```
cmake -B build -D rktest_build_tests=ON -D rktest_build_samples=ON
```

## Running the snapshot tests of RK Test

RK Test uses python and snapshot tests to test the output from the library. To run the snapshot tests, first install python:

- https://www.python.org/downloads/

Then, install pytest:

```
pip install pytest syrupy
```

Finally, run the tests from repo root:

```
pytest -vv
```

If a snapshot needs to be updated, run:

```
pytest --snapshot-update
```

And commit the updated snapshots.

Commit message:

Update README.md with more build instructions (#27)

README.md, after:

![run_test badge](https://github.com/Warwolt/rktest/actions/workflows/run_tests.yaml/badge.svg)

# RK Test

RK Test is a small test library for C99 programs, written to closely mimick
[Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest). RK Test is lightweight and
easy to integrate into a C project to add testing capabilities,  as it consists
of only a single source and single header file.

## Features
RK Test has the following features:
- Small and easy to integrate, one '\*.c' file and one '\*.h' file
- Supports Windows, MacOS and Linux.
- Self registering tests (relying on a compiler extension common to MSVC, AppleClang and GCC)
- xUnit style assertions and test reporting very close to Google Test

## Usage
Due to the similarities between RK Test and Google Test, it may be helpful to read the [Google Test primer](https://google.github.io/googletest/primer.html.).

To set up a simple test suite, create a source file that includes `rktest.h` and link against the `rktest_main` library.

Test cases are then defined with the `TEST()` macro, which takes to arguments: the name of the test suite, and the name of the test case. A body is then given, which will be executed like a function. The `EXPECT_EQ` takes two integral types and compares them, and fails the test in case they are not equal.

```C
#include <rktest/rktest.h>

int factorial(int n) {
	int result = 1;
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		result *= i;
	}

	return result;
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_negative_is_one) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(-1), 1);
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(-42), 1);
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_zero_is_one) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(0), 1);
}

TEST(simple_tests, factorial_of_positive_numbers) {
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(3), 6);
	EXPECT_EQ(factorial(4), 24);
}
```

Building and running the above gives the following output:

![Sample1 output](/samples/sample01_output.png)

We can modify the `factorial` function to be faulty to observe the error messages printed when the tests fail.

```diff
int factorial(int n) {
	int result = 1;
-	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
+	for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
		result *= i;
	}

	return result;
}
```

Rerunning the test suite now gives:

![Sample1 failing output](/samples/sample01_output_failing.png)

## Integrating
RK Test consists of two files, `rktest.c` and `rktest.h`. The easiest way to integrate RK Test into your project is to just add these two files to your source tree and build them into a library `rktest`.

When building, if you define the `RKTEST_DEFINE_MAIN` symbol you will get a main function defined in the library. Alternatively, you can add your own test runner `main.c` and call `rktest_main()` from that file.

The `CMakeLists.txt` in this repository already does this and builds two libraries, `rktest` and `rktest_main`.

All the `TEST()` tests in your unit test files will automatically be discovered by RK Test and executed once `rktest_main` is called (either by your `main.c` file or automatically if you linked against `rktest_main`).

### CMake
In case your project is using CMake, you can easily integrate RK Test by adding this repository into your source tree and then including the RK Test `CMakeLists.txt` from your own.

There's an example repository available here:
https://github.com/Warwolt/rktest_example

In short, to integrate RK Test into your CMake project, first add this repository into your file structure either by copying it or by using `git add submodule` to add a git submodule.

Then, update your `CMakeLists.txt` with a `add_subdirectory` and add a test runner executable that links against `rktest_main`. Example:

```cmake
add_subdirectory(external/rktest)

add_executable(tests
    src/hello_world.c
    tests/hello_world_tests.c
)
target_include_directories(tests PRIVATE src)
target_link_libraries(tests PRIVATE rktest_main)
```

## Assertions
All assertion macros come in `EXPECT_*` and `ASSERT_*` variants, where `EXPEC_*` continues to execute the remaining test on failure, whereas `ASSERT_*` aborts the current test case on failure.

Additionally, all macros has `*_INFO` variants, which allows passing a
printf-style formatting string that will be printed if the assertion fails to
give additional user specified details.

RK Test defines the following assertion macros for bools:

| Macro name           | Assertion               |
| -------------------- | ----------------------- |
| EXPECT_TRUE(actual)  | `actual` equals `true`  |
| EXPECT_FALSE(actual) | `actual` equals `false` |

Integer assertions:

| Macro name                  | Assertion              |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| EXPECT_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` == `expected` |
| EXPECT_NE(actual, expected) | `actual` != `expected` |
| EXPECT_LT(actual, expected) | `actual` < `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LE(actual, expected) | `actual `<= `expected` |
| EXPECT_GT(actual, expected) | `actual `> `expected`  |
| EXPECT_GE(actual, expected) | `actual `>= `expected` |

Long integer assertions:

| Macro name                       | Assertion              |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| EXPECT_LONG_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` == `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_NE(actual, expected) | `actual` != `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_LT(actual, expected) | `actual` < `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LONG_LE(actual, expected) | `actual `<= `expected` |
| EXPECT_LONG_GT(actual, expected) | `actual `> `expected`  |
| EXPECT_LONG_GE(actual, expected) | `actual `>= `expected` |

String assertions:

| Macro name                          | Assertion                                                     |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| EXPECT_STREQ(actual, expected)      | `actual` is the same string as `expected`                     |
| EXPECT_STRNE(actual, expected)      | `actual` is NOT the same string as `expected`                 |
| EXPECT_CASE_STREQ(actual, expected) | `actual` is the same string as `expected` (ignoring case)     |
| EXPECT_CASE_STRNE(actual, expected) | `actual` is NOT the same string as `expected` (ignoring case) |

Floating point assertions (See [this article](https://randomascii.wordpress.com/2012/02/25/comparing-floating-point-numbers-2012-edition/)
regarding Units in Last Place):

| Macro name                         | Assertion                                              |
| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| EXPECT_FLOAT_EQ(actual, expected)  | `actual` and `expected` are within 4 ULP of each other |
| EXPECT_DOUBLE_EQ(actual, expected) | `actual` and `expected` are within 4 ULP of each other |

## Why use RK Test instead of Google Test?

While Google Test is a much more mature test library, it's written in C++. This means that when testing C code, it requires calling that C code from C++ code, which can be awkward due to requiring `extern C` or lacking C99-style designated initializers.

Additionally, the Google Test source is many thousands of lines long, which
makes it a non-trivial dependency to add to a project.

Comparatively, RK Test is lightweight at just around 1k lines of code in just
one `*.c` file and one `*.h` and is written in C, so both code under test and
the test cases are written in the same language. This allows RK Test to easily
be integrated into other C projects, while keeping largely the same development
experience as Google Test.

## See also

Here's a list of other unit test frameworks built on similar techniques:

- [Google Test](https://github.com/google/googletest)
- [Criterion](https://github.com/Snaipe/Criterion/)
- [Rexo](https://github.com/christophercrouzet/rexo/)

## Building the test and sample files

The files in the `tests` and `samples` are by default not built, but can be enabled by passing the following when generating the CMake build:

```
cmake -B build -D rktest_build_tests=ON -D rktest_build_samples=ON
```

## Running the snapshot tests of RK Test

RK Test uses python and snapshot tests to test the output from the library. To run the snapshot tests, first install python:

- https://www.python.org/downloads/

Then, install pytest:

```
pip install pytest syrupy
```

Finally, run the tests from repo root:

```
pytest -vv
```

If a snapshot needs to be updated, run:

```
pytest --snapshot-update
```

And commit the updated snapshots.
